My
name is Phillip S. Smith. I go by Phil. I have
initially joined Mitchell Energy and
Development Corp., which is the parent company of
the Woodlands Corporation, in January of 1980.
Prior to that time, I was a partner with Arthur
Anderson & Co. here in Houston, Texas. I initially
joined Mitchell as the Senior Vice President,
Chief Financial Officer, and reported to Joe
Williams, who was President of the
Administration and Finance Division at the time.
Subsequent to Joe Williams leaving, I assumed the
position of the President of the Administration
and Financial Division. of Mitchell Energy and
Development Corp., which basically encompasses
all of the non-operating aspects of the Mitchell
companies, such as finance, accounting,
administration, data processing, public
relations, anything not directly related to
operations. Do you have the legal office as well?
Pardon? The legal office, you had that as well?
Legal, yes, legal would fall in that category.
Since that time, that was, I forget exactly when
Joe Williams left, but probably 81 or so, I would
imagine, 1981, I guess, perhaps late 1980. As a
result of those functions, all of those functions
to the extent they're provided across the board to
the entire Mitchell Energy and Development
Corporation, which includes the energy
operations as well as the real estate operations.
My involvement in the real estate aspects has been
primarily from, say, the administration
accounting finance standpoint, and I've been
closely involved in financing the Woodlands
operations since joining
Mitchell. Tell me a little bit more about your
background. Do you have degrees from Yes, I
graduated with a BS degree from Mississippi State
University in 1957. I have a CPA.
Joined Arthur Anderson and Co. on graduation from
Mississippi State. Worked one year, went in the
U.S. Army Artillery for two years as a second
lieutenant. Rejoined Arthur Anderson. in May of
1960 and was with them here in the Houston office
until I joined Mitchell in January of 1980. At the
time I left Mitchell, I was a partner in the firm.
You mean Anderson? I left Arthur Anderson & Co. I
was a partner in the firm and had responsibility
for the firm's oil and gas industry competence
program. How did Mitchell find out about you?
Where did you two link up? Previous to joining
Mitchell, I had been the engagement partner on the
Mitchell audit for a number of years and had
rotated off of the audit. And in connection with
the staff reorganization that they were
undertaking in late 79 and early 80, I joined the
company in, say, January of 1980. and in effect
took over most of the responsibilities that Bill
Tonary had previously held as Chief Financial
Officer at that time. How, on a work-a-day basis,
would you interact with the Woodlands
Corporation?
Generally speaking, well, as I said, in all of the
areas that I have responsibility for,
accounting, finance, probably the major ones,
personnel, all of those different areas. A number
of people that work for me in those areas are more,
you know, are directly involved on a day-to-day
basis. My primary involvement or greatest
personal involvement would probably tend to be in
the finance and accounting areas. What kind of
expertise are you bringing to that that is
required? Well, of course, any just the normal,
you know, we have responsibility.
My area, you know, has responsibility for all the
reporting requirements, financial reporting
requirements for Mitchell Energy and
Development Corp., which is a public company, and
so we keep all of the accounting records and
prepare the financial statements and
everything. And the data processing? All of the
Mitchell entities, and that's,
would all come under my supervision and
responsibility, and the same thing with the
financing. you know, the various different loans
and financial structures that are required to
finance the entire company's operations,
including real estate, would come under my area of
responsibility. During the, you know, the 80s,
Houston went through a rather severe economic
downturn. How did that affect your job and the
Woodlands particularly? Because it did affect
Yes, well of course initially when I joined
Mitchell in January 1980, Houston was still
booming.
We had one or two very good years after that in terms
of profitability and earnings. And then starting
I think in either 81 or 82, you know, earnings began
to decline because of the decline in oil prices or
the erosion of the oil economy, which caused the
banks to have problems, which caused the real
estate industry in Houston to have problems. And
probably the, in 1986 when the price of oil really
went down I think as low as $10 a barrel, was when it
really began to strongly impact not only the
energy operations of Mitchell Energy and
Development Corp, but also obviously the real
estate operations. And the company went through a
period of very low earnings, about $8 million a
year for a couple of years there, fiscal 87 or 88, I
believe. And since then, you know, we've started
to come back in terms of earnings perspective. But
during that time, particularly starting in, say,
in 86, fiscal 86 or fiscal 87, you know, a company
had to make a number of adjustments from an
operating and financial standpoint in terms of
cutting back on cost, overhead, employee head
counts, and everything. in order to adapt to a
different operating environment that existed
during that period of time. I've been told that the
woodlands is self-sufficient. Has that always
been true? Self-sufficient? Financially, that
it earns a profit.
Generally speaking, they've been profitable.
Because of the nature, though, of the company, the
Woodlands Corporation's assets, which a
substantial portion of which is undeveloped
land,
and the fact that they have a relatively high level
of debt on the real estate side, a lot of the
financial debt is guaranteed by the parent
corporation, which is what enables the real
estate operation to carry its financial, you
know, or support its MND that it has. So, because
the picture we've been getting is that
the Woodlands is part of George Mitchell's
vision. It doesn't seem
necessarily be something he's doing because of
the immediate return he's going to get. It's
rather, well, some people have poppy farms.
George Mitchell's building the woodlands.
Has that been your impression as well? Well, of
course, hopefully it'll ultimately turn out to be
an economic
success.
Generally speaking, I would say George and most
people perceive that the energy, speaking in
terms of today's time, 1990, late 1990, you know, I
think the energy portion of the company is looking
for the near and mid-term is more likely to have a
major impact on the company's overall
operations, whereas you probably won't see any
significant benefits from the real estate
operations in terms of level of earnings and cash
flows and things of that nature. It would be more a
mid to long term time frame, which would
say being anywhere from five to 15 years from
today's time.
The nature of a long master plan community like the
Woodlands. You have a lot of front end costs and a
lot of major investments to make and a lot of
carrying costs in terms of interest charges,
property taxes, things of that nature. And so as a
result, generally speaking, real estate has been
a net borrower of funds in the 1980s. Is that just
the Woodlands, or are you including the thing at
Snowmass and Pirate World? I tend to speak, when I
speak the Woodlands Corporation, that would be,
it's all in effect in one corporation, although
they have a number of different subsidiaries. I'm
basically referring to real estate in total,
although the Woodlands itself probably
comprises two-thirds or three-fourths of the
real estate operations. So it's by far the... It's
the most significant part of the overall real
estate operation. But we haven't precisely
separated out the operations of the woodlands
itself in the head of real estate operations. I
suppose it could be done, but we don't necessarily
report our financial statements
on that basis. As we've interviewed these other
gentlemen, Every
corporation has
a culture to
it, an environment that is unique to that
corporation. It seems that an essential element,
which wasn't surprising, but the strength of it is
a little surprising. of Mitchell Edgerton
Development Corporation, Woodlands
Corporation, the personality of George
Mitchell, his vision, his sense of what he wants to
do.
How have you perceived George Mitchell's
influence in the development of the Woodlands? I
mean, obviously he was the one who set the vision in
motion, but he's also done many, many other things
ancillary to the original vision, which
to some many were a little bit surprising.
Well, I think clearly, you know, George Mitchell
has his very definite views on what the woodland
should be, how it should be developed, and what the
components of it would be. And while he does
delegate a lot of the day-to-day operations, I
mean, clearly he's got pretty much a hands-on
approach in terms of the direction, overall
management,
major decisions that go into the
The overall development of the woodlands,
as to the type of development, the character of it,
things of that nature. That's clearly the case.
You know, things such as Hart, who's been in the
Advanced Research Center, Cynthia Woods
Mitchell-Povig, things of that nature. And so
it's happening, yeah. And I was intrigued by the
Venture Capital Group, which, so folklore goes,
was started in a lobby, you know. You grabbed
somebody and gave them $15 million and said, do it.
And it spun off into something. Well, I don't know
if it was quite that simple. Well, I've been told
that story by a couple of people who maybe were
repeating the same source. I don't know. Yeah.
Well, I think it actually probably evolved a
little bit more over time.
You know, part of the concept was to try to bring
startup companies to the world. And nurture tech.
Yeah. High tech type of medical type areas. You
know, the ultimate investment that would have
been made in venture capital was really done over a
long period of time. It certainly wasn't funded
all up front initially. By a long shot,
you know, they got a couple of people who were
migrants who started out working in it initially.
You know, we started out making, you know, and
investment at a time in different various
companies. Part of the criteria would be to focus
on companies that we tend to locate in Whitlam. And
ultimately, the Marty Center became the
organization for Bruce Wither's Transmission
Processing Division. So, you know, it certainly
wasn't a matter of putting $15 million in up front
by a long shot. Oh, no, I know that. It was a gradual
development over the period of several years. But
in comparison with Kingwood, for example, which,
you know, people could raise an analogy, here's a
corporate developed community, you know, and yet
it's on the surface and substantially, it's
totally different.
Would there be a
corporation, would the woodlands remain
substantially the same if George Mitchell were,
well, God forbid, if he should pass away. Well,
eventually he will. He'll leave. He has to. We all
do. But what will happen when that occurs? Oh, you
know, it's obviously, on any development, it's a
product of, you know, the person that's in charge
of it and the direction they want it to go. You know,
I would say at this point, you know, it would be hard
to see. I think the fundamental you know,
structure and organization is in place for the
woodlands.
Obviously a different individual might do, would
do different things, you know, some things
differently than what George would do. I think the
basic concept of what's been developed to date
would be hard to necessarily make any massive
restructuring just simply because So many of the
streets and roads and buildings and other
infrastructure is already in place, like
Woodlands. You know, the character of the
buildings and companies that are already here
can't change, you know, what the fundamental
structure is.
And so, you know, it would just really depend on the
mentality. You know, Georgia's put a lot of
infrastructure in, a lot of things, you know, some
things have been done that other people might or
might not conclude would be an essential part of
the development, you know, so that would get to be a
judgment call. Would you essentially feel that
things would march on pretty much as they have in
the past because of the already built-in history
or Well, the infrastructure, Mr. President, is
that a fair statement? Yeah, I would think that's
generally true. Again, you can always dedicate,
we've got about 4,000 net acres dedicated for
commercial industrial space,
you know, a lot of which has not been developed at
this point. You know, only the future will tell,
for instance, if there will be a market for that
much space, you know, and so some of the character
of that could change. Some of the character of the
undeveloped land could change, but I think the
general approach to the development, you know,
should pretty much be locked in, I would think.
Okay. What are the challenges the woodlands faces
presently, from your perspective, from a
financial and operating
perspective? Well, obviously we've gone through
in Houston since the early to mid 60s up to now. It's
been pretty tough times economically because of
the downturn in the oil business, which affected
the real estate business also. So that's probably
slowed the pace of development. fair amount what
otherwise would have been at today, simply
because Houston had that negative growth during
some of those years there. You know, now we're
being in the process, Houston is in the process of
coming back from a business standpoint and a real
estate standpoint, I think. particularly in the
residential area, there's still a big surplus of
office space, commercial space in Houston. And
that's going to probably take a few more years to
work through that system. And so the residential
here is going very strongly now in terms
of numbers of people and families moving to the
place. And of course the overall concept really
contemplates an integrated economic community
of about 150,000 people ultimately. We're around
30,000 now. And that wouldn't be in the downtown.
We're somewhere, you know, at what we call the
Metro Center. You know, so in fact you sort of have
really a city of 150,000 people with all the
facilities and everything. adjacent to it, with
the concept that, you know, theoretically
there'd be a job for every family that lives in the
woodland, not that they'd all be matched up, but so
that you'd have, so I think the big challenge would
be to get, build up the commercial and other
aspects of the operation that you'd float.
somewhat lagging behind the rest of the
woodlands, primarily because of economic, or in
large part, probably because of the economic
conditions. And there continues to be a national
real estate flood, particularly in commercial
space, so it's going to probably take some time to
work through all that.
Again, the carrying cost on an investment like
this is very large, and pace is an important part of
the development. The longer you carry it, the more
the carrying costs are. So it's going to be
important to pick up pace there on the commercial
side at some point. Are you, or those who work with
you or for you, what sort of staff reporting and
analyses are going to be needed to identify, for
example, the rate or the pace of growth. I know that
goes on. Well, obviously, that's an integral part
of the planning process that the overall company
goes through, not just for real estate. But are
there plans right now for dealing with the decade
of the 90s, or with the next five years, What are you
forecasting, I
guess is what I'm asking, in terms of ? Oh, in terms
of forecasting, I think generally speaking,
they're probably looking at hopefully selling
about 1,000
houses a year on average
in the foreseeable future.
Hopefully the regional mall, as soon as the
process
has been worked on, hopefully that will get
started here in the next year or two. So it would
just be a continuation that we need to fill up the
existing office space in the woodlands and
hopefully look for
other commercial development opportunities.
The mall should be a good catalyst for development
in the area.
things in that picture. How does Mr. Mitchell
utilize public relations to his advantage?
What's his operating philosophy in terms of the
utilization
of public relations? Well, I was, you know, that's
probably something he has spent a lot of time and,
you know, is willing to devote some personal time
to to the public relations area, and I think
probably uses it to his advantage and the
company's
advantage, you
know, very well. He's probably one of your more
outspoken type of chief executive officers for a
major company. We probably have a more
sophisticated operation in that respect than
maybe other companies our size would tend to have.
And that's because of Mr. Mitchell? Yeah, I would
say primarily that's reflective of his wishes and
desires, and I guess feeling that there's
benefits to be gained
from that time. And I tend to agree
that that's probably true. So he does a good job
of utilizing the media, I think. He's generally
known as an accessible type of person for the
media. So as a result, the public tends to get
called on to comment
and be a part of things that the otherwise
wouldn't. Generally speaking, most of the
publicity that's generated tends to be in favor
of the nation. So any time you've got a particular
real estate product or something to sell, In all
corporations, there's line responsibilities,
and then there's the individuals fulfilling
those line responsibilities frequently can be
interchanged, or others can do that. But then
individuals also have unique, or not unique, but
maybe special, skills or abilities or capacities
that they bring to a task. I'm going to ask you to be
modest. What is it you bring? What is George
Mitchell, why does he want you around? What's your
real contribution to the corporation? Well,
obviously it's in the areas that I have, you know,
primary responsibilities for.
Obviously I have an accounting degree, CPA. I'd
say my primary strengths are in the financial
accounting financing area.
Aside from the overall administrative
responsibilities, that's probably the major
major contribution that I make to the overall
organization. To be sure the company is well
financed and the financial reporting is properly
handled. Since George is not inclined to sell a lot
of equity in the company per se, most of our
financing for the company's operations has to be
either internal cash flow, profits, or third
party debt, or in some cases
joint venture arrangements. So that's obviously
a company, a $2 billion company,
and there are a lot of requirements in that area. I
don't want to take all your afternoon. Are there
questions I should have asked you that I didn't?
Oh, gosh, I'm sure there's a lot of things you could
get into. The,
you know, I think, well, you know, Mitchell
Energy, I guess, and Development Corp is, in a
sense, two different businesses, you know,
energy and real estate. Obviously, when you have a
62% shareholder, the chief executive president,
chief executive officer, whatever else he wants
to be in the company, you know, that's still to a
large extent run as one company in the sense of
overall direction. So
while the operations are distinct in and of
themselves, you know, I still don't, you know,
financial standpoint and everything and sort of
view it as an overall operation. As I say, part of
the thing that makes the real estate work,
particularly during this development phase, is
the strength of the energy operation in terms of
the cash flows and the values and things of that
nature. debt on the real estate side tends to
increase, you know, as projects and other things
are developed.
You don't necessarily have the liquidity in a real
estate operation that you have in an oil, gas, or
energy operation. And so it's important to, an
important part of George being able to do what he's
done on the real estate side and probably the
presence of the energy operations there. and
apparent guarantees on the real estate debt, that
while the values are there on the real estate side
to support the debt, the liquidity, particularly
when you have these downturns in the real estate
economies, the real estate is not a liquid asset,
even in good times. In difficult times, it's
impossible to move almost, unless it's up in a fire
sale price. The liquidity that the energy
provides, or the fact that it's there to provide
liquidity if it's needed, is an important part of
how the real estate can be managed. Yeah, that's
come through. Do you view the two corporations as
essentially the same, as you were mentioning?
Well, it's the same in the sense that, as I say,
they... I mean, they do more than hold hands.
They... I mean, the operating, I guess, my areas
tend to be more of a common link between the two. I
mean, the people that operate the individual
businesses are different. Sure. In real estate,
transmission processing, production, things of
that nature. But in terms of the fact that, you
know, the overall resources of the company are
utilized to achieve the overall operating
results, you know, of the company, you know, to
that extent that I was saying common, there's
common ground there
that makes part of it, you know, for instance, part
of our major financing for the company has been too
public. Mitchell Energy and Development Corp,
the parent, has had two public debt issues at the
parent company level, which basically has no
operations. It's just a holding company that owns
the stock from the energy cell and the real estate
cell. So, a lot of your probably better than half of
our debt financing in the public debt markets and
downstream to the two operations
as needed to fund their operations.
Are you the architect of some of these debt
management? Well, it's my area,
obviously, the financing is my responsibility.
So, to that extent, you know, it's all We're
financing as any Mitchell Energy and Development
Corp, but not as an individual subsidiary. Now, we
do some
of the financing, but
it's a subsidiary level. But a good part of it has
been, you know, better than half of it probably
has been at the Grand Country level, too. Is there a
flow both directions of
Well, that's maybe not what I wanted to ask. The
decision-making process, there's various cells
or staff groups that do planning and development
and what have you. How are those decisions made?
The decisions of
what you were just talking about, about how You
mentioned half is done at the parent company level
and half is done elsewhere. Who decides? Well, it
depends on what you're talking of in terms of
financing aspects. Most of that's part of my
decision area. In terms of the overall budget,
each operating group prepares their capital
budgets and their operating plans. And we pull
them all together on a company-wide basis. And
then to the extent you set priorities or there are
limitations on resources, which there usually
are, then George has to make the final decision. So
he sets the priorities in terms of? Oh, yeah. Yeah,
clearly. Yeah, clearly. OK. That's what I
figured. What else? Oh, nothing just jumps out at
me. They say you could, on individual components,
I'm sure we could talk on a lot of things, not
knowing what level of detail you want to get into.
Well, part of the problem is I don't know that
either. Yeah. Which is a bit of a challenge.